Working with RB101-RB109 Small Problems Exercises
The Small Problems exercises are a set of programming problems that help students in course RB101 gain Ruby fluency and practice their programming skills. It also helps them prepare for the assessments. These exercises should give you lots of practice in solving small programming problems in any programming language.

Difficulty Levels
The problems are classified as Easy, Medium, and Advanced. These classifications are somewhat fluid, though, which means that some exercises may seem easier or harder than you might expect. To pass the assessment, you should be able to solve problems that have a difficulty level similar to those in the Medium groups. For complete mastery, you should be able to handle most of the Advanced level exercises, though you won't find anything of that level on the assessment.

Ideally, you should be able to solve most Easy exercises without leaning too heavily on the Ruby documentation. That doesn't mean that you shouldn't use it; however, you should be familiar enough with Ruby's syntax, conditionals, loops, method definitions, and so on, that you don't need it. You should also be familiar with the fundamental data types and the most often-used methods. If you need to look up information too often, you may spend more time reading than you do writing code. Keep practicing until you build up some "muscle memory."

Expect to spend more time with the documentation when you get to the Medium and Advanced level exercises. When you get to this stage, you will be pushing the boundaries of your knowledge, and a little light reading will help you over them into the next level.

Some exercises (chiefly those in the Medium and Advanced groups) introduce new topics that we don't discuss in the course material. That can make some problems seem much harder than they are. That's intentional: the inclusion of such exercises teaches you how to find information on your own. Feel free to use the documentation and your favorite search engine. If the problem is still too hard, don't worry; study the solution and discussion, then come back to it later.

Solving Problems
Before you attempt to work any of these exercises, take a few hours to watch and study our Problem Solving videos. These videos walk you through the various steps of solving problems of different kinds. Take notes, and use those notes as you work through the exercises to:

Understand the problem
Set up your test cases
Describe your inputs, outputs, and data structures
Describe your algorithm
Begin coding
Use these steps for every problem, even if it seems too simple. Don't attempt to hack and slash your way through a program; you can get away with doing that with simple problems, but with every small increase in complexity, the harder it is to hack-and-slash your way to a solution, so code with intent every time. You'll know you're doing it right when you spend more time getting ready to code than you spend coding. (That won't be true all the time, but, when your preparation is thorough, the code almost writes itself.)

Knowing how to solve computing problems and practicing those techniques will take you a long way.

Exercise Tips
Put your solutions in separate files, and push them to GitHub for future reference.
Work the problems in the order presented.
Keep track of which exercises give you difficulty or that you have trouble understanding.
If necessary, go back to the Ruby Basics Exercises and work the appropriate exercises first.
Code with intent (see the problem-solving videos again)
Use the problem-solving techniques described in the videos.
Don't method hunt. Method hunting is searching for the perfect pre-built method to do what you need.
Don't be afraid to use basic looping mechanisms like loop and while.
After you have code that works, you can think about simplifying it. However, that isn't the point of these exercises. It is good practice if you're up to the challenge, though.
If something doesn't work right:
Think about why it doesn't work.
Study any error messages you receive.
Use irb or pry to explore what's happening.
Don't try something else and hope it works; think about what needs to change, then change it.
If you can't solve a problem at first, take a break and come back to it later.
If you can't solve the problem after a pause, take a quick look behind the Solution button.
If there is an Approach/Algorithm section, read it and then try the problem again.
Take a quick look at the answer to get a general feel for what it does, then try again.
Read the Discussion section and study the solution until you feel you understand it.
Type the presented code in and run it. Use irb or pry or some puts statements to study how it works.
Close the solution and try to build your own without referring back to ours.
Once you have a working program, compare it to our solution and discussion.
Don't worry if our solution looks different from yours.
Ask yourself, what does our solution do differently than yours?
Why do you think we did it the way we did it?
Does your program miss some of the "edge cases"?
In some cases, we show short, concise solutions; many are "one-liners." You are not expected to come up with such succinct code yourself, so don't feel intimidated or discouraged if your solution is considerably longer. That's normal and expected.
Focus on writing code that is clear to you.
Strive to understand our "one-liner" solutions, but your answer doesn't need to look like them. Some of our solutions are hard to follow at this stage, but they introduce useful techniques and methods for the future.
A lot of Ruby programmers write code in this compact manner, or worse, so you must learn to at least read it.
Compare your solution with solutions posted by other students.
See if you can use those solutions to make your code easier to understand.
See something interesting? Read about it in the documentation.
Post your answer if it differs notably from other solutions.
After working through the exercises, go back to those that gave you difficulty. Keep going back until you believe you understand both the problem and the solution.
The Further Exploration sections try to make you think about the exercise from a different perspective. Some of these Further Explorations are at the same difficulty level as the original, but some are considerably harder.
Don't attempt the Further Explorations until you fully understand the original problem.
Do try the Further Explorations once you fully understand the original. These problems are optional but recommended to improve your skills.
Don't worry if you can't solve the Further Explorations! These problems are more about thinking than about writing code; that is why we don't supply solutions.
Feel free to post your Further Exploration solutions with the other exercise solutions (make sure you identify it as a Further Exploration solution).
Feel free to open a regular Forum post about a Further Exploration to discuss it (but try to avoid posting answers!)